{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Examples of Markdown Syntax\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The examples given in the ProfHacker blog post were all indented to keep them as code rather than have Markdown translate them to HTML. Here the examples in this plain text file will be translated to various file formats, also available in this repository.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 The Examples\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Italics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Be sure to read William James, {\i The Varieties of Religious Experience}.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Bold\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 James's book will {\b definitely} be covered on the final exam.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Block quotes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 You must be able to discuss James's definition of religion:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li720 \fi0 Religion, therefore, as I now ask you arbitrarily to take it, shall mean for us the feelings, acts, and experiences of individual men in their solitude, so far as they apprehend themselves to stand in relation to whatever they may consider the divine.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 A link\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 James's book is available in full text at Google Books {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://books.google.com/books?id=OESbXvtUkIsC"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
{\f1 http://books.google.com/books?id=OESbXvtUkIsC}
}}}
.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Numbered and unnumbered lists\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab An item.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Another item.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Yet another item.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Item one.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Item two.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Item three.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 A Footnote\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 William James offered a narrow definition of religion for the purposes of the Gifford Lectures.{\super\chftn}{\*\footnote\chftn\~\plain\pard {\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 William James, {\i The Varieties of Religious Experience} (New York: Longman, Green, and Co., 1903); cf. Thomas Tweed, {\i Crossing and Dwelling: A Theory of Religion} (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).\par}
}\par}
}
